docs: document systemcrypto experiment removal (#2337)
microsoft/go: eng/doc/fips/README.md

> [!NOTE]
> Since Go 1.25, `systemcrypto` is enabled by default on Linux and Windows. There is no need to manually enable using OpenSSL/CNG under the hood anymore. See also [the Go 1.25 changelog](#go-125-aug-2025). Since Go 1.26, `systemcrypto` is also enabled by default on macOS.

> > Since Go 1.27, `systemcrypto` is no longer a `GOEXPERIMENT` setting. Supported platforms use it automatically unless it is disabled with `MS_GO_NOSYSTEMCRYPTO=1`.

Reviewer: It seems to me that it's reasonable to put these all in the same note, but they should have always had their own start-of-line IMO to be easy to spot.

Also, changelog ref.

```suggestion
> Since Go 1.25, `systemcrypto` is enabled by default on Linux and Windows. There is no need to manually enable using OpenSSL/CNG under the hood anymore.
> See also [the Go 1.25 changelog](#go-125-aug-2025).
>
> Since Go 1.26, `systemcrypto` is also enabled by default on macOS.
>
> Since Go 1.27, `systemcrypto` is no longer a `GOEXPERIMENT` setting. Supported platforms use it automatically unless it is disabled with `MS_GO_NOSYSTEMCRYPTO=1`.
> See also [the Go 1.27 changelog](#go-127-aug-2026).
```

| Default | `GODEBUG=fips140=only`, Go 1.27+ | Compliant | Same as `fips140=on`, but also panics if a non-FIPS-approved algorithm is used. Note: if the backend does not support a particular algorithm, the call panics rather than falling back to Go standard library crypto. See [Cross-Platform Cryptography](../CrossPlatformCryptography.md) to check algorithm support per platform, and [Usage: Runtime](#usage-runtime). |
| Default | `GO_OPENSSL_VERSION_OVERRIDE=1.1.1k-fips` | Compliant | Can be used to create a compliant app. On Linux, this environment variable causes the runtime to load `libcrypto.so.1.1.1k-fips` instead of using the automatic search behavior. This environment variable has no effect on Windows or macOS. |
| `-tags=requirefips` | Default | Compliant | Can be used to create a compliant app. The behavior is the same as `GODEBUG=fips140=on` and `GOFIPS=1`, but no runtime configuration is necessary. See [the `requirefips` section](#build-option-to-require-fips-mode) for more information on when this "locked-in" approach may be useful rather than the flexible approach. |
| `MS_GO_NOSYSTEMCRYPTO=1` | Default | Not compliant | Crypto usage is not FIPS compliant. |

> | `GOOS=linux CGO_ENABLED=0`, Go 1.27+ | Default | Compliant | Uses the [cgo-less OpenSSL backend](../NocgoOpenSSL.md) on supported architectures. Crypto usage is FIPS compliant. |

Reviewer: "Crypto usage is FIPS compliant" can be misleading vs. the "Can be used to create a compliant app" language, because not all crypto usage would be FIPS compliant.

If `systemcrypto` is disabled (see [build option to use Go crypto](#build-option-to-use-go-crypto)), Go standard library cryptography is used.

> [!NOTE]
> Prior to Go 1.27, `systemcrypto` could be selected with `GOEXPERIMENT=systemcrypto`. In Go 1.27 and later, `systemcrypto` is no longer a `GOEXPERIMENT` setting. It is enabled automatically on supported platforms, `go env GOEXPERIMENT` doesn't report it, and `GOEXPERIMENT=systemcrypto` is rejected.

> [!NOTE]

> > Prior to Go 1.27, per-platform experiments (`opensslcrypto`, `cngcrypto`, `darwincrypto`) were available. These have been removed in Go 1.27. The build tags associated with those names remain available for source compatibility when `systemcrypto` is enabled.

Reviewer: "Available" seems like an odd wording:

```suggestion
> Prior to Go 1.27, per-platform experiments (`opensslcrypto`, `cngcrypto`, `darwincrypto`) were available. These experiments have been removed in Go 1.27, but the build tag associated with each experiment remains supported, ensuring source compatibility.
```

In a cross-build scenario, such as using Linux to build an app that will run on Windows, `GOOS=windows` will correctly use CNG-based code for the `systemcrypto` backend.

A cross-build to Windows or macOS will typically work, because these backends use approaches like syscalls to call the crypto library rather than cgo.

> On Linux in Go 1.27 and later, `systemcrypto` can also be used when cgo is disabled by selecting the [cgo-less OpenSSL backend](../NocgoOpenSSL.md) on supported architectures.

Reviewer: Split up for attention, remove clutter to make it flow better, reduce frights (we support way more architectures than I'd expect):

```suggestion

A cross-build to Linux in Go 1.27 and later will work if the [cgo-less OpenSSL backend](../NocgoOpenSSL.md) is used.
The cgo-less backend may be unavailable for some processor architectures that aren't commonly used at Microsoft.
```

If it's acceptable to become noncompliant with the internal Microsoft crypto policy and FIPS, you can use the Go standard library cryptography implementation by disabling the `systemcrypto` backend:

- Set the `MS_GO_NOSYSTEMCRYPTO` environment variable to `1`.

In Go 1.25 and Go 1.26, `GOEXPERIMENT=nosystemcrypto` was also supported. It has been removed in Go 1.27.
Remove `GOEXPERIMENT=systemcrypto` and `GOEXPERIMENT=nosystemcrypto` from build scripts when moving to Go 1.27 or later.

- `MS_GO_NOSYSTEMCRYPTO=1` doesn't involve the `GOEXPERIMENT` mechanism. It's simple to use and to incorporate into any build process.
- Only the exact value `1` disables `systemcrypto`. Other values leave the default behavior in place.

> [!WARNING]

> > Go 1.27 and later reject `GOEXPERIMENT=systemcrypto` and `GOEXPERIMENT=nosystemcrypto` with an error. Use `MS_GO_NOSYSTEMCRYPTO=1` to disable the backend.

Reviewer: Too early to remove this info about 1.25 and 1.26 IMO.

### Multiple GOEXPERIMENTS

When using `GOEXPERIMENT`, you can enable other non-crypto experiments simultaneously using a comma separator, e.g. `GOEXPERIMENT=systemcrypto,loopvar`. Combining other experiments with `systemcrypto` is supported.
In Go 1.27 and later, `systemcrypto` isn't configured through `GOEXPERIMENT`.
Do not include `systemcrypto` or `nosystemcrypto` in `GOEXPERIMENT`; the go command rejects both values.

You can still use `GOEXPERIMENT` for other toolchain experiments, using a comma separator when enabling multiple values.

For more information about other Go experiments, read the output of the command `go doc goexperiment.Flags` to see the experiments available in your specific build of the Go toolset, or check [the online goexperiment package doc](https://pkg.go.dev/internal/goexperiment) to see the options for other versions.

### Build tags

Selecting most `GOEXPERIMENT`s can also be done by setting the corresponding `goexperiment.*` build tag. This is supported for all crypto backends.

> For example, `go build -tags=goexperiment.systemcrypto` command will enable the same backend as setting `GOEXPERIMENT=systemcrypto` then running the build command.

Reviewer: Doesn't some of this still apply to 1.26 and shouldn't be deleted yet?

> These tags reflect the backend selected by the toolchain; they are not the supported way to enable or disable `systemcrypto`.

Reviewer: Wrong section for this info, next section "Conditional behavior if a crypto backend is enabled" is about this.

  - The same applies to `GOLANG_FIPS`.
- The per-platform GOEXPERIMENTs (`opensslcrypto`, `cngcrypto`, `darwincrypto`) have been removed.
  - Using any of the removed experiments will result in a build error.
  - The build tags associated with the removed GOEXPERIMENTs remain supported for legacy source compatibility.
  - The `goexperiment.systemcrypto` build tag remains supported, and its behavior has not changed.
- `GOEXPERIMENT=systemcrypto` and `GOEXPERIMENT=nosystemcrypto` have been removed.
  - System crypto is enabled automatically on supported platforms.
  - To disable system crypto, set `MS_GO_NOSYSTEMCRYPTO=1`.
  - `systemcrypto` is no longer included in `go env GOEXPERIMENT`, `goexperiment.Flags`, or other GOEXPERIMENT-derived output.

>   - The `goexperiment.systemcrypto` build tag is still emitted when system crypto is enabled.

Reviewer: We don't call it "system crypto":

```suggestion
  - `systemcrypto` is enabled automatically on supported platforms.
  - To disable `systemcrypto`, set `MS_GO_NOSYSTEMCRYPTO=1`.
  - `systemcrypto` is no longer included in `go env GOEXPERIMENT`, `goexperiment.Flags`, or other GOEXPERIMENT-derived output.
  - The `goexperiment.systemcrypto` build tag is still emitted when `systemcrypto` is enabled.
```

"System crypto backend" could also fit the last point well:

```suggestion
  - `systemcrypto` is enabled automatically on supported platforms.
  - To disable `systemcrypto`, set `MS_GO_NOSYSTEMCRYPTO=1`.
  - `systemcrypto` is no longer included in `go env GOEXPERIMENT`, `goexperiment.Flags`, or other GOEXPERIMENT-derived output.
  - The `goexperiment.systemcrypto` build tag is still emitted when a system crypto backend is enabled.
```

### Go 1.25 (Aug 2025)

> - The `systemcrypto` goexperiment is now enabled by default on Windows and Linux. In current releases, disable it with `MS_GO_NOSYSTEMCRYPTO=1`; in early Go 1.25 releases, `GOEXPERIMENT=nosystemcrypto` was the available disable knob.

Reviewer: I think it's ok to revise this, but it'd be better to link rather than keep each note up to date individually:

```suggestion
- The `systemcrypto` goexperiment is now enabled by default on Windows and Linux. In Go 1.25.0, `GOEXPERIMENT=nosystemcrypto` was the available disable knob, but the current supported disable knob is documented by the [Build option to use Go crypto](#build-option-to-use-go-crypto) section.
```

- `GOEXPERIMENT=boringcrypto` has been removed.

> - `GOEXPERIMENT=allowcryptofallback` has been removed. Instead, if it's necessary to opt out from using a system crypto backend, use `MS_GO_NOSYSTEMCRYPTO=1` in current releases. This is an internal mechanism that is not intended for use when building a Go application. This document has always recommended against using it, so we anticipate that this change won't affect users of the Microsoft build of Go. Please [contact the maintainers of the Microsoft build of Go](https://github.com/microsoft/go/blob/microsoft/main/SUPPORT.md) if you need to use it so we can understand the scenario and help find a safer alternative.

Reviewer: (Same as above, also clean up bad "this".)

```suggestion
- `GOEXPERIMENT=allowcryptofallback` has been removed. Instead, if it's necessary to opt out from using a system crypto backend, use the disable knob documented by the [Build option to use Go crypto](#build-option-to-use-go-crypto) section. `allowcryptofallback` is an internal mechanism that is not intended for use when building a Go application. This document has always recommended against using it, so we anticipate that this change won't affect users of the Microsoft build of Go. Please [contact the maintainers of the Microsoft build of Go](https://github.com/microsoft/go/blob/microsoft/main/SUPPORT.md) if you need to use it so we can understand the scenario and help find a safer alternative.
```
